Botania 10th Anniversary Commemorative CD
Afterword
TODO(williewillus) put the final prod tag date here

Hi everyone, williewillus (willie) here. I hope you enjoyed the content on this disc.

It's a minor miracle that this CD even became a real thing. I was shitposting about it
around May earlier in 2023, after I noticed that our 10th anniversary was coming up.
Somehow, the discussion turned serious on May 29th, 2023, and a doc was set up to
brainstorm ideas. The disc repository was created soon after on June 3rd.

Why a CD? It was my first thought of a commemorative piece of merchandise that would be
a bit more special than a T-shirt, hoodie, socks, or other clothing. I took inspiration
from doujin and Touhou culture in Asia, where passion projects often get released on CD
in a limited run and never again afterwards. One of my most prized possessions is one such
CD, the soundtrack to the Touhou fangame Elegant Impermanence of Sakura. It's just cool to
hold in your hand and know that it's one of the few in existence in the world. Likewise,
if you aren't reading this on GitHub, you are probably one of around ~200 people that will
ever actually read this message from the disc. How special is that?

We tried soliciting fanworks from the community for this disc, but only a handful of
distinct people submitted works. That's okay though, because we still ended up with quite
a bit of content! The rest of you can wait for the 20th anniversary to submit your
fanworks :).

Botania has been a major part of my life for the past 9 years, and I hope it has been for
you too. Perhaps you may never load this disc into your computer ever again after you do
so for the first time (or you don't even have a disc drive), but I hope that whenever your
gaze lands on this disc sitting on your bookshelf, warm memories of Botania and Minecraft,
created and cherished over the past decade, come to mind.

Special Thanks:
- All patrons, fans, and players of Botania
- All contributors to Botania, large and small
- All fans who submitted bonus content to the disc
- Staff of the 10th Anniversary Commemorative Disc:
  - Project Lead: williewillus
  - Artist: Dani
  - Musicians: Firel, Kain Vinosec, MettyMagic, Quad City DJ's
- Vazkii, Violet Moon, and the Botania development team
- ...and You, supporter of Botania for the last 10 years.

williewillus
Violet Moon Modding
